in this video I'd like to tell you about
the idea of vectorization so whether
you're using octave or a similar
language like MATLAB or whether you're
using Python numpy are Java or C C++
although these languages have either
built into them or have readily and
easily accessible different to numerical
linear algebra libraries that are
usually very well written highly
optimized often sort of developed by
people that you know have PhDs in
numerical computing or they're really
specialized in numerical computing and
when you're implementing machine
learning algorithms if you're able to
take advantage of these linear algebra
libraries or these numerical linear
algebra libraries and make subroutine
calls to them rather than sort of write
code yourself to do things that these
libraries could be doing if you do that
then often you get code that first is
more efficient so just run more quickly
and take better advantage of and your
parallel hardware your computer may have
and so on and second it also means that
you end up with less code that you need
to run sort of a simpler implementation
that is therefore maybe also more likely
to be bug free and as a concrete example
rather than writing code yourself to
multiply matrices if you let octave do
it by typing a times B that will use a
very efficient routine to multiply the
two matrices and there's a bunch of
examples like these where if you use
appropriate vectorized implementations
you get much simpler code and much more
efficient code let's look at some
examples here's our usual hypothesis for
linear regression and if you want to
compute a key of X notice that there's a
sum on the right and so one thing you
could do is compute the sum from J
equals 0 to J equals n yourself another
way to think of this is to think of H of
X as theta transpose X and what you can
do is think of this as you know
computing this inner product between two
vectors where theta is you know your
vector say theta 0 theta 1 theta 2 if
you have two features if N equals two
and if you think of X as this vector X 0
x1 x2 and these two views can give you
two different implementations here's
what I mean here's an unvectorized
implementation for how to compute H of X
and by unvectorized I mean without
vectorization we might first initialize
your prediction this to be zero point
zero this is going to eventually be on
predictions going to eventually be H of
X and then I'm going to have a for loop
for J equals 1 through n plus one
prediction gets incremented by theta J
times XJ so it's kind of this expression
over here by the way I should mention in
these vectors I've rolled over here I
had these vectors being 0 index so has
theta 0 theta 1 theta 2 but because
MATLAB is one index theta 0 in MATLAB we
might end up representing as theta 1 and
the second element ends up as theta 2
and this third element might end up as
theta 3
just because vectors in MATLAB are
indexed starting from one even though
you know I wrote theta and X here
stopping indexing from 0 which is why
here I have a for loop J goes from 1
through n plus 1 rather than J goes
through 0 up to n right but so this is
an unvectorized implementation in that
we have a for loop that you know summing
up the n elements of the sum in contrast
here's how you write a vectorized
implementation which is that you would
think of X and theta as vectors and you
just set prediction equals theta
transpose times X and just computing
like so so you instead of writing you
know all these lines of code with a for
loop use they're just at one line of
code and what this what what this line
of code on the right will do is it will
use octaves highly optimized numerical
linear algebra routines to compute this
inner product between the two vectors
theta and X and not only is the
vectorized implementation simpler it
will also run much more efficiently so
that was octave but the issue of
vectorization applies to other
programming languages as well
let's look at an example in C++ here's
what an unvectorized implementation
might look like we again initialize you
know prediction 20.0 and then we now
have a for loop for J equals 0 up to n
prediction plus equals theta J times XJ
where again you have this explicit for
loop that you write yourself in contrast
using a good numerical linear algebra
library in C++ you could use write the
function like or rather in contrast
using a good numerical linear algebra
library in C++ you can instead write
code that might look like this so
depending on the details of your
numerical linear algebra library you
might really have an object this is a
c++ object which is vector theta and the
c++ object which is a vector X and you
just take theta dot transpose times X
where this x becomes a C++ sort of
overload the operator so that you can
just multiply these two vectors in C++
and depending on you know the details of
your numerical linear algebra library
you might end up using a slightly
different syntax but by relying on the
library to do this in the product you
can get a much simpler piece of code and
a much more efficient one let's now look
at a more sophisticated example just to
remind you here's our update rule for
gradient descent for linear regression
and so we update theta J using this rule
for all values of J equals 0 1 2 and so
on and if I just write out these
equations for theta 0 theta 1 theta 2
assuming we have two features so N
equals 2 then these are the updates we
perform to theta 0 theta 1 theta 2 where
you might remember am i saying in an
earlier video that these should be
simultaneous updates so next thing we
can come up with a vectorized
implementation of this here are my same
three equations written in a slightly
smaller font and you can imagine that
one way to implement these three lines
of code is to have a for loop that says
you know for J equals 0 1 through 2 to
update theta J
like that but instead let's come up with
a vectorized implementation and see if
we can have a simpler way to basically
compress these three lines of code or
for loop they you know effectively does
these three sets one set at a time let's
say you can take these three steps and
compress them into one line of a
vectorized code here's the idea what I'm
going to do is I'm going to think of
theta as a vector and I'm going to
update theta as theta minus alpha times
some other vector Delta where Delta is
going to be equal to one over m sum from
I equals 1 through m and then this term
over on the right okay so let me explain
what's going on here here I'm going to
treat theta as a vector so there's an n
plus 1 dimensional vector I'm singing
that theta gets your updated as that's a
vector or n plus 1 alpha is a real
number and Delta here is a vector so
this subtraction operation that's a
vector subtraction because uh alpha
times Delta is a vector and so I'm
saying theta gets you know this vector
alpha times Delta subtracted from it so
what is the vector Delta well this
vector Delta looks like this and what is
meant to be is really meant to be this
thing over here
concretely Delta will be a n plus 1
dimensional vector and the very first
element of the vector Delta is going to
be equal to that so if we have that
Delta you know if we index it from zero
as Delta 0 Delta 1 Delta 2 what I want
is that Delta 0 is equal to you know
this first boxing green up above and
indeed you might be able to convince
yourself that Delta 0 is this 1 over m
sum of you know H of X X I minus y I
times X I 0 so let's just make sure that
we're on the same page about how Delta
really is computed Delta is 1 over m
times this sum over here and you know
what is this sum well this term over
here that's a real number and the second
term over here X I this term over there
is a vector right because X I you know
may be a vector that would be you say
xi0 xi1 xi2 right and what is the
summation well what the summation is
saying is that this term that is this
term over here this is equal to H of x1
minus y1 times x1 plus h of x2 minus y 2
times x2 plus you know and so on okay
because this is a summation over I so as
I ranges from I equals 1 through m you
get these different terms and you're
summing up these terms here and the
meaning of each of these terms you know
this is a lot like if you remember
actually from the from the earlier quiz
in this right you you solve this
equation we said that in order to
vectorize this code we will instead set
u equals to V plus 5w so we're saying
that the vector u is equal to 2 times
the vector V plus 5 times the vector W
so this is an example of how to add
different vectors and this summation is
the same thing this is saying that the
summation over here is just some real
number right that's kind of like the
number 2 or some other number times it
back to x1
you know two times V and staying with
some other number at times x1 and then
plus you know instead of five times W we
instead have some other real number plus
some other vector and then you add on
other vectors you know plus dot dot dot
plus the other vectors which is why
overall this thing over here that whole
quantity that doubter is just some
vector and concretely the three elements
of delta correspond if N equals two the
three elements of delta correspond
exactly to this thing to the second
thing and this third thing which is why
when you update theta according to theta
minus Alpha Delta we end up having
exactly the same simultaneous updates as
as the update rules that we had on top
so I know that there was a lot that
happens on the slides but again feel
free to pause the video and data
encourage you to sort of step through
the differences if you aren't sure what
just happened I'll encourage you to step
through this line to make sure you
understand why is it that this update
here with this definition of Delta right
why is it that that's equal to this
update on top and it's still not clear
one one one insight is that you know
this thing over here that's exactly the
vector X and so we're just taking you
know all three of these computations and
compressing them into one step with this
vector Delta which is why we can come up
with a vectorized implementation of this
of the step of linear regression this
way so I hope this step makes sense and
do do look at the video and make sure
and see if you can understand it in case
you don't understand quite the
equivalence of this math if you
implement this this turns out that the
right answer anyway so even if you
didn't quite understand the equivalence
if you just implemented this way you you
really get linear regression to work but
if you are if you're able to figure out
why these two steps are equivalent then
hopefully that will give you a better
understand
vectorization as well
and finally if you are implementing
linear regression using more than one or
two features so sometimes we'll use
linear regression with tens or hundreds
or thousands of features but if you use
the vectorized implementation of linear
regression usually that will run much
faster than if you had say your own
volume there was you know updating theta
0 then theta 1 and theta 2 yourself so
using a vectorized implementation
usually people are getting a much more
efficient implementation of linear
regression and when you vectorize later
algorithms that we'll see in this class
is a good trick whether in octave or
some of the language they see pluses
Java for getting your code to run more
efficiently